 
---------------------------------------------
USAR OBJ+ID : userId
---------------------------------------------


- poder descargar materiales con fotos /sin fotos / fondo blanco/ fondo disciplina






FOTOS QUE FALTAN

The marks of the Two Lands

The Egyptians were obsessive about balance:

The plant of Upper Egypt was the lotus; that of Lower Egypt, the papyrus.

On many columns and decorations the two appear intertwined: that's the symbol of the union of the Two Lands.

Whenever the state weakened — and it happened several times, in what are called the «intermediate periods» — Egypt broke along exactly that line: the south with its capital at Thebes and the north in the delta.

The unity wasn't natural: it had to be held together.

-

The gods of Egypt

The Egyptians didn't have a god: they had hundreds, and it didn't bother them that the same phenomenon might be explained two ways at once.

Their religion wasn't a dogma, it was a way of keeping the world in order.

Ra was the sun, which died every night and was born again every morning after crossing the world of the dead.

His daily journey was the guarantee that the universe was still working.

Osiris was a king murdered by his brother Seth and cut to pieces; his wife Isis, the great magician, put his body back together and conceived their son Horus.

Osiris went on to rule over the dead, and Horus defeated Seth and inherited the throne of the living.

All of Egyptian politics is in that myth: the living pharaoh is Horus, and when he dies he becomes Osiris.

Anubis, with the head of a dog or a jackal, guided the dead and guarded the cemeteries.

Thoth, with the head of an ibis, had invented writing and recorded the verdict of the judgment.

Hathor was love, music and joy; Sekhmet, lion-headed, was disease and healing fury; Bastet, the cat who protected the home; Ptah, the craftsman who created the world with a word, patron of the workers of Memphis; Amun, the hidden god of Thebes, who ended up merged with Ra as Amun-Ra, the most powerful in the empire.

Above all of them was something that wasn't a god but a principle: Maat, truth, justice and the rightful order of the cosmos, pictured as a feather.

There was one attempt to break with all of this.

Around 1350 BC, the pharaoh Akhenaten (with his wife Nefertiti) abolished the worship of every other god and imposed a single one, Aten, the sun god: the first state monotheism in history.

He closed temples, changed the art and founded a brand-new capital.

It lasted exactly as long as he did: at his death, his successor Tutankhamun restored the old gods.

-

How the people of Egypt lived

We know how the workers lived because their villages have been excavated and, above all, because they wrote: thousands of scraps of pottery and stone (ostraca) with lists, letters, complaints and jokes.

The workers at Giza lived in a town beside the site with bakeries, breweries and workshops.

Their rubbish heaps are full of cattle, sheep and fish bones: they ate meat, something an ordinary farmer barely ever tasted.

And their skeletons show healed fractures, amputations and arthritis: they worked brutally hard, but they got medical care and weren't thrown away when they broke.

At Deir el-Medina, the village of the artisans who dug and painted the tombs of the Valley of the Kings, the week was ten days long: eight of work and two of rest, and they slept on site during the shift.

They were paid in kind — grain, bread, beer, fish, vegetables, oil, clothing, firewood — because money didn't exist yet.

Above them were the scribes, who could read and write and were therefore exempt from certain taxes and from physical labor.

There's an Egyptian schoolbook text, the «Satire of the Trades», in which a father talks his son into studying by describing how horrible it is to be a barber, a fisherman, a blacksmith or a laundryman.

The lesson couldn't be clearer: study is the only way up.

And then there was everybody else: farmers who paid their taxes in grain and could be flogged if they came up short, potters, weavers, brewers, musicians, priests on rotating shifts, specialized doctors (there were eye doctors and dentists), embalmers (well paid but socially impure for handling corpses) and slaves, almost always prisoners of war, who did exist but were a minority.

Fun fact: Egyptian women could own land, inherit, divorce, testify in court and sign contracts in their own name — unthinkable in Greece or Rome a thousand years later.

-

What happened when someone died

The Egyptians weren't obsessed with death: they were obsessed with Life, so much so that they wanted it to go on.

The process took about seventy days.

The internal organs were removed (the brain was pulled out through the nose and thrown away, because they saw no use for it) and the liver, lungs, stomach and intestines were kept in four canopic jars protected by the sons of Horus.

The heart was left inside: it was the seat of intelligence, memory and conscience, and it was needed for the final judgment.

The body was covered in natron, a salt that dried it out, then anointed with resins and oils and wrapped in hundreds of meters of linen, with amulets tucked between the layers.

Then came the judgment, in the Hall of the Two Truths.

The dead person declared they had done no evil (the so-called «negative confession»: I have not stolen, I have not lied, I have not killed, I have not made anyone cry, I have not diverted the water from my neighbor's canal) and their heart was set on a scale against the feather of Maat.

Anubis watched the balance, Thoth recorded the result and, if the heart weighed more than the truth, a monster called Ammit ate it: that was the final death, the only one they truly feared.

If they passed, they went on to the Fields of Iaru, an improved version of Egypt, with its Nile, its harvests and its family.

For the journey the dead were buried with food, furniture, board games, clothes, sandals, little figures of servants (the ushabtis, who would work in their place) and with the Book of the Dead, a manual with the exact formulas for getting through each test: even the afterlife had its paperwork.

What matters is that this wasn't just for pharaohs.

In time, anyone who could pay for it could be mummified; and whoever couldn't was buried in the desert sand with a couple of objects and their name written down.

Because for the Egyptians there was one last condition for living forever: that someone go on saying your name.

Erasing the name from a tomb was the worst sentence imaginable.

Fun fact: tombs were painted with scenes of banquets, fishing, music and dancing, not of sorrow.

And in some of them a «letter to the deceased» was left, asking them for favors, complaining about the inheritance or reproaching them for leaving the family in a bad way.

-

The Phoenicians: the people who sold everything

The Phoenicians weren't an empire, and that's exactly what makes them fascinating.

They were independent cities — Tyre, Sidon, Byblos, Berytus — squeezed between the mountains of Lebanon and the sea, with no territory to expand into; so they became sailors.

Their name was given to them by the Greeks: phoínikes, «the red ones» or «the purple ones», after the product that made them famous.

From a sea snail, the murex, they extracted a purple dye so hard to obtain (thousands of shells for a few grams, and an unbearable stench in the workshops) that it was worth more than its weight in silver and ended up reserved for kings.

That's why purple is still the color of royalty today.

They were the finest navigators of antiquity.

They sailed at night by the North Star, which the Greeks called «the Phoenician star».

They founded colonies all across the Mediterranean: Gadir (Cádiz, around 1100 BC, the oldest city in western Europe), Carthage (814 BC, founded according to legend by Queen Dido, a fugitive from Tyre), Palermo, Ibiza, Málaga, Cartagena.

Fun fact: the word «Bible» comes from Byblos, the Phoenician port where the Greeks bought Egyptian papyrus to write on.

Which is to say: the most-read book in history is named after a merchants' harbor.

Fun fact II: Herodotus tells of a Phoenician expedition that sailed all the way around Africa in about three years, setting out through the Red Sea and coming back through the Strait of Gibraltar.

-

Darius the Great

If Cyrus conquered the empire, Darius I turned it into a state.

-

Battle by battle

MARATHON (490 BC): the Athenians and Plataeans defeated a larger Persian army thanks to the strategy of Miltiades.

-
The man behind the legend

As a boy he was taught by Aristotle, no less.

He learned philosophy, biology and literature, and Alexander carried a copy of 

-

Ashoka: the king who carved his remorse into the rocks

What we know about Ashoka we know because he had it carved himself.

-
The persecutions: what was actually done to them

Two things need saying at once: the persecutions were atrocious, and they weren't continuous.

-

Constantine: why an emperor changed gods

In 312, Constantine was gambling the empire against his rival Maxentius at the gates of Rome.

-

How the Greek and Roman gods fell

The gods of Olympus didn't vanish in a day or through a military defeat.

-

What was actually traded on the Silk Road

First, a misunderstanding worth clearing up: almost nobody traveled the whole route.

-

Why it fell, specifically

There's no single cause, and be suspicious of anyone selling you one.

-

Viñeta 2

Go deeper

What the Byzantines did

THEY SAVED THE LAW.

The emperor Justinian 

-

Things about Muhammad that are almost never told

His marriage to Khadija.

She was a rich widowed merchant, fifteen years his senior, and she was his employer before she was his wife: he worked running her caravans.

-

The monk who went to India for books

In 629, a monk named Xuanzang left Chang'an without imperial permission — leaving the country was forbidden — to go to India in search of the original Buddhist texts, 

-

How a peasant really lived

They were 90% of the population, so talking about the Middle Ages means talking about them, not about the knights.

-

What they were like, beyond the horned helmet

THE HORNS NEVER EXISTED.

Not a single Viking helmet ever found has horns.

-

Crusade by crusade

THE PEOPLE'S CRUSADE (1096).

-

The savage side: the price of that empire

None of the above can be told without this.

The Mongol method of conquest was calculated terror, and it worked because they kept both halves of the bargain: the city that surrendered without a fight paid tribute and went on living; the city that resisted was wiped off the map, without exceptions and with no negotiating afterward.

-

What changed after the plague

Here's the most interesting part, and the part that's almost never told: the greatest demographic catastrophe in European 

-

Joan of Arc: the girl France abandoned

Joan was born around 1412 in Domrémy, into a family of farm laborers.

-

Isabella the Catholic: «free vassals», and what actually happened

In 1495, Columbus sent a few hundred captured Taíno people to Spain to be sold as slaves.

-

The scientific method, explained

The scientific method isn't a list of steps to be recited: it's a way of protecting yourself from yourself, because human beings are 

-

Specialization: the idea that multiplied output

The most powerful invention of the Industrial Revolution wasn't a machine: it was a way of organizing work.

-

Robespierre's Reign of Terror

Between September 1793 and July 1794, the Republic defended itself through terror organized by law.

-

The black soldiers: 180,000 men who earned a country

When the war began, the Union army wouldn't accept black soldiers.

-
-
-
-
-
-

HISTORIA DE LAS RELIGIONES


-

For decades the logical order was taken for granted: first farming, then villages, then the surplus, then temples.

In 1994, the excavation of Göbekli Tepe, in southeastern Turkey, turned that sequence around.

There, around 9500 BC — more than six thousand years before Stonehenge and the pyramids — someone raised circular enclosures with T-shaped stone pillars up to five meters tall and weighing several tons, carved with reliefs of foxes, boars, snakes, scorpions, vultures and human arms.

The astonishing part is who did it: hunter-gatherers.

There was no farming, no pottery, no metal, no domestic animals and no city around it.

It's reckoned that hundreds of coordinated people were needed, fed for weeks, and the site turns up the remains of enormous quantities of game and of beer made from wild grain: feasts.

That lets you invert the hypothesis, and it's one of the most provocative ideas in archaeology today: maybe we didn't settle down and then build sanctuaries, but rather the need to gather periodically at a sacred place and to feed that crowd was one of the pushes that led to domesticating wheat.

Which is to say: perhaps we gathered first to believe and only afterward learned to farm.

At Çatalhöyük, also in Turkey, a few millennia later, religion was already inside the houses: bull skulls set into the walls, paintings of vultures and hunts, figures of a woman seated between two big cats and, under the floors of the homes, the family's dead — the skull sometimes retrieved, coated in plaster and painted, so as to keep it present.

Fun fact: in those houses people literally lived with their ancestors: they slept on top of them.

The idea that the dead go on being part of the household, so often repeated afterward in China, Africa, Rome or Mexico, is older than writing.

-

Stones that face the sun

Between 5000 and 2000 BC, all across Atlantic Europe, thousands of dolmens, standing stones and great collective stone tombs appear.

-

























CONECTANDO CON SUPABASE

NUNCA escribas aquí la contraseña real: este fichero está en el repositorio y
cualquiera con acceso al código (o al historial de git) la vería. Las cadenas de
conexión van SIEMPRE en el .env local y en las variables de entorno de Render.

Formato (coge la cadena real del panel de Supabase → Settings → Database):

postgresql://postgres:[TU-PASSWORD]@db.[TU-PROYECTO].supabase.co:5432/postgres

Poner en env: DATABASE_URL="postgresql://postgres:TU_PASSWORD@db.TU_PROYECTO.supabase.co:5432/postgres"

Para migraciones usa el POOLER (IPv4); la conexión directa es solo IPv6.


Si usas TypeORM

En app.module.ts:

TypeOrmModule.forRoot({
  type: 'postgres',
  url: process.env.DATABASE_URL,
  autoLoadEntities: true,
  synchronize: true, // SOLO en local
})


Y asegúrate de tener:

npm install @nestjs/typeorm typeorm pg